[AUDIO LOGO]
>>DAVE ASPREY: Biohacking,
it's not just about being well.
It's about being more than well.
It's the power to
transform yourself.
Are we ready?
I'm Dave Asprey, and
this is Biohacking.
Hi, I'm Dave Asprey, the
father of biohacking.
And people call me
that because this
is a new movement
in society, and it's
a new word in the English
language that I created.
In this episode,
you're going to learn
about fitness and exercise.
But they are not what
you think they are.
And it's not about struggle.
It's not about suffering.
It's not about
forcing yourself to go
to the gym with willpower.
Turns out that muscle mass
is one of the greatest
predictors of longevity.
So if you have more muscle
up to a certain level anyway,
you're just going to live longer
because you can handle whatever
life brings your way.
And I want you to have that.
So in this episode,
I'm going to teach you
how to structure your exercise
routine to put on muscle
and to lose fat in the least
possible amount of time
without over exercising and
overstressing your body.
Today, most people either
don't exercise at all
because they figured out
it doesn't work very well,
or people exercise all the time.
Neither one of those is
where you want to be.
I want you to get great
returns on very small amounts
of exercise.
Most of us were just
doing it all wrong.
One of the things
that's confusing
is that exercise is not the
same thing as moving around.
You can go for a
walk with your kids.
It's just not exercise.
You moved, and movement
is good for you.
And usually, more
movement is better.
In order for something
to be exercise,
it has to cause the
body to transform.
And that means it must be
brief, it must be intense,
it must be infrequent, not
every day, it must be safe,
and it must be purposeful.
And one of the reasons
you want to do this
is that exercise increases BDNF.
That stands for Brain
Derived Neurotrophic Factor.
This is the stuff in
your brain that gives you
a young person's brain.
It makes you a neuroplastic
so you can learn.
So if you exercise the
way I just described,
infrequently, you'll have a
brain that can adapt better
to the world you live in.
And when it comes
to cardio, people
think that cardio helps
you lose fat quickly.
That's actually
not how it works.
It's true that having
better cardio capacity
extends your lifespan.
There's a measure
called VO2 max,
which is how much oxygen your
body can use at one time.
That is a measure of longevity.
But it turns out more
cardio is not better.
You've probably
heard people saying,
get your 10,000
steps per day in.
Well, I was the
CTO and co-founder
of the first fitness tracker
that could get your heart
rate from your wrist.
And so I went, and I
looked deep on the data.
In the 1950s, a Japanese
company, the first company
to make a pedometer, invented
that 10,000 steps rule
so they could sell their tech.
There is no scientific evidence
behind 10,000 steps per day.
That's just marketing.
When I weighed 300 pounds,
I believe that stuff,
I would push myself.
I made a sacred commitment that
I was going to lose the weight.
So I went to the gym six
days a week no matter what,
and I went for 90 minutes a day.
45 minutes of weights.
45 minutes of cardio.
I skipped Sundays.
I also cut my calories.
I cut my fat.
And at the end of 18 months
of this, 702 hours in the gym,
I still had a 46-inch
waist, I was still fat,
and I could max out
most of the machines.
But I didn't know that steady
state cardio, the treadmills
I like to do,
equals wear and tear
on your joints and ligaments.
Researchers at Yale Medicine
found that at least 50%
of runners are
injured each year,
and they think the number
may be much higher.
Running and chronic
cardio teaches your heart
to beat faster and to
move less blood per beat.
But if you're a powerful,
healthy animal or human,
the healthiest state
is to be able to move
a lot of blood per heartbeat.
So cardio teaches your heart
to go blip, blip, blip.
And if you do weight training
and appropriate types
of cardio, not the long distance
cardio, in a single heartbeat,
you can transform
your blood flow.
So cardio doesn't
equal strength.
It also turns out,
we like to believe
that doing more of something
gives us better results.
But what the body
really listens to
is what I call slope
of the curve inputs.
What that means is that if
you can turn on a stressor,
like sprinting, or picking
up something heavy,
if you can do that very quickly
to the point of exhaustion
and then recover faster than
mother nature would expect,
then you're sending
this beautiful signal
into the body that says, a tiger
might have eaten you, that's
why you did something
hard, but now you're
really safe because you
return to baseline quickly.
So that's a signal to change.
And as long as you had
your minerals, as long
as you had your protein
and you had your fat,
your body has what it
takes, and the signal,
you put those together, you
get rapid transformation.
As an example, we know that
high intensity interval training
works well in less time.
We used to think just go
for a run for an hour.
But now, we
understand that if you
were to do five 1 minute
sprints with a break in between,
you get better
results in less time.
But it's still miserable.
While using AI,
you can figure out
exactly what curve causes
humans to change the most.
And the results
ought to upset you.
It turns out that
if you use AI, you
come up with something
called REHIT, which
is a core technology
behind my fitness franchise
that's opening
across the country.
REHIT stands for Reduced
Exertion High Intensity
Training.
In this kind of training,
it's two 20-second sprints
without sweating over
a five-minute period.
If you do that
three times a week,
15 minutes per week,
that's as much time
as you spend
brushing your teeth,
you improve your
cardiac capacity by 12%.
If you did an hour a day,
you would improve by 5%.
REHIT improves
insulin sensitivity,
and it increases
your VO2 max, which
is the core fitness for
cardiovascular capacity.
But 15 minutes a week of
that kind of exercise,
which requires no sweating,
will increase your VO2 max
by 12%, which is equal to about
two years of healthy lifespan.
If you were to do an hour
a day of chronic cardio,
you would improve by 2%.
Six times more results in
15 minutes versus an hour
a day of suffering
on a spin bike.
That is why this episode
is so important for you.
You probably don't
go to the gym enough.
And if you do go to the
gym, you might go too much.
But you just learned a way to
get six times better results
in the amount of time you
spend brushing your teeth.
This is what AI
and tech is doing.
This is why biohacking
is so important.
The technical
details of REHIT is
that you're causing very
rapid depletion of something
called glycogen in your cells.
This is the
carbohydrate storage.
And that releases signaling
molecules, including
PGC-1 alpha, which is a sign
that your body exercised,
and something called AMPK.
And this tells your
cells to make more energy
producing mitochondria.
This works best with the AI bike
that is used at upgrade labs,
but you can do it at home.
To get the full details on how
to do REHIT at home for free,
go to daveasprey.com.
It's all there for you.
There's another way to
speed up a cardio workout,
and I do it sometimes.
I strap on a mask, and
I Inhale pure oxygen
to get more energy and
more exercise in less time.
Studies show that
breathing hyperoxic air
enables higher
intensity training,
and it creates significant
improvements in power output
compared to breathing
regular air.
This is another hack that you
may have available to you.
And these biohacks
will become part
of how we transform ourselves
over the next 10 years.
You just get early access
because you're here
on this episode.
So let's talk about
resistance training.
Inside your muscles,
you have something
called proprioceptors.
And these are little
networks of intelligence
that your muscles use to
know where they are in space
and what's safe.
So your muscle
has its own brain.
Your elbow has its own brain.
And they're constantly
watching what
you do to see how
much you're lifting
in case it might be dangerous.
And since you might wobble
when you're holding a dumbbell,
then it knows that it
needs to hold back.
So your proprioceptors
are lying to you
to make sure that you're safe.
You have way more
strength than potential,
but your body won't
let you access that.
So you can use
technologies or techniques
to show your body that you
can get past a certain level
so it raises your
strength threshold.
What that means is that if
you can remove or change
that acceleration of
gravity, the things
that your proprioceptors
are sensing,
you can push your muscles
to those new levels.
So if you work out
say with dumbbells,
you won't be tricking
your proprioceptors,
but you can get better
results than normal
by focusing on the
eccentric part of your lift.
So if you were to
do a dumbbell curl,
you want to go up at
whatever speed you go up,
but you want at least 10
seconds to lower the weight.
So that means you spend
more time fighting gravity.
And you want to do
the number of reps
it takes to reach exhaustion,
which is usually about 10.
You don't need to
do 30 or 40 reps.
There's also another
kind of exercise
that works better than just
picking up rocks, which
is what dumbbells really are.
They're concentrated
rocks turned into iron.
You can use isometric exercise.
So with this, you recruit
as many muscle fibers
at once as you can It can even
help to lower blood pressure.
Isometric exercise means you're
pushing against something
that won't move.
You can push against
your hands like this.
This is an isometric exercise.
And you can do all
sorts of things
even like a plank, where
you're just holding a position.
And that changes things so you
put on muscles more quickly
than doing things
with a normal speed.
You can stand in
a narrow hallway
and push as hard as you
can against one wall
or bracing against the other.
There is no gravity in there.
So your body feels that
it's safe to push harder,
and you actually
will push harder.
Another hack that
works ridiculously
well is resistance bands.
So if now you're
lifting something
and you're pushing against
a stretchy piece of latex,
it doesn't act like
gravity, so the body
has to recalibrate and
readjust, and it grows muscle
more quickly.
My job is to teach you how
to build muscle very quickly
so that you can spend
less time exercising
and more time becoming
conscious, more
time with your kids, more
time in service to others.
I just don't want
you to waste time
in the gym getting very few
results per minute of effort.
If you just love going to
the gym, well, keep going.
No one's going to
judge you for that.
But most of us are
balancing gym against kids,
against learning, against
work, against art,
against all these other things.
You can do both.
And the data shows,
if you do what I just
said with variable
resistance elastic bands,
you can grow muscles
about three times more
quickly than you would if
you were picking up barbells.
You can also use special
electrical muscle stimulation
machines that have a unique type
of direct electrical current.
And if you do this on your
things, this is not tense.
This is something that's
designed for building muscle.
You can also build muscle
three or maybe even five times
as fast as traditional
weightlifting.
So should you find a clinic
that does that because you
could go there 20% as much?
Maybe.
One of the things
that EMS does is
it allows you to preferentially
reprogram your muscles so
that they lengthen, so
they're more relaxed,
they're more pliable,
they're more resilient,
and you can move through
a greater range of motion.
If you think about it, if
you're all the way out here
and you want to pick something
up, it's really hard,
and it's easy to pick
it up right here.
But if there's
electricity stimulating,
you're going to get stimulated
all the way out here
and all the way back here.
So you're changing
the input signal,
so your body will
transform more quickly.
And at the height of
all these technologies,
there's something called the
Cheat Machine at Upgrade Labs.
The Cheat Machine
uses AI to monitor
how your body is resisting and
to change the resistance based
on how you're fighting.
So instead of fighting gravity,
you're fighting an AI machine,
and your body will adapt
the quickest possible level
that we've ever seen.
There's also something
that isn't really
in the fitness realm
when we think about it
but belongs in
the fitness realm.
And it's called movement.
And so with movement, you
said, go for a walk, Dave.
Now, movement is about
moving in a way that
works to maximize your workouts
and works to reduce stress
on the body.
If you're alive, you
have movement problems
that you're likely unaware of.
There's a practice called
functional movement that
allows you to download new
software into your body's
operating system so that you can
access a muscle you don't even
know is there.
For example, if you stood on
a stool, just a little stool,
and you straighten your legs
so they're not quite locked,
you bend down and
reach with both hands.
If your arms aren't
exactly the same length,
something is holding you back.
Maybe there's a
muscle in your leg,
or your back, or your shoulder.
You don't know that it's tense
because it's invisible to you,
but it is.
And a functional
movement specialist
can help you turn on full
access to all of the muscles.
The other test that works really
well is an active leg raise.
Lay flat on your
back on the floor
or on a very firm surface,
and you raise one leg
straight as high as
you can while you
keep your back and
your butt on the floor.
If one or both of
your legs are weak,
it means you don't know
how to turn on your hip
flexors all the way, or you
have hamstring problems.
Limited neck mobility
is another thing.
It comes from looking down
at your phone all day.
You can train your neck
muscles with a head
harness with a resistance band.
And that'll strengthen
the deep neck
flexors that help you
maintain proper posture.
It doesn't take very
long to fix your posture
if you strengthen exactly the
right muscles in your neck.
The easiest way
to do all of this
is to see a functional
movement expert
because you'll get a very high
return on investment for this.
They'll assess you
in about an hour.
They'll tell you where
your problems are
and what specific exercises
address the muscles
that your body forgot about.
On top of that, just make
sure you move every day.
And play is the
best way to do that.
Walk your dog,
play with kids, do
yoga, whatever makes you happy.
Just remember,
that's not exercise.
That's movement.
The other reason that
lifting things is important
is bone density.
In order to be fit and
to live a long time,
you need to have bones
that are hard to break.
If you have a fragility
fracture after the age of 50,
you've got about a
50% chance of dying
within one year based on
complications of that fracture.
That means higher
bone density is
going to give you a much better
chance of living a long time,
and it gives you better
blood glucose regulation.
In other words, you
don't have diabetes
because you have dense bones.
You have a better
metabolic profile.
And how do you get denser bones?
Well, strength training
is the way to do it.
All of the hacks you
just learned about
will increase bone density.
As an example, as I'm
recording this, I am 50.
I'd have bone
surgery a year ago.
And the doctor couldn't
cut through the bone
with his normal saw.
And afterwards, he said,
Dave, what are you doing?
I operate on people
half your age,
and their bones cut like butter.
What's your secret?
The secret is what you're
learning in this episode.
I also practice something
called whole body vibration.
And this is a platform you
can stand on that vibrates.
NASA uses this to cause
astronauts to build bones
after they come back from space.
The reason that
whole body vibration
works is that most cells in
your body are piezoelectric.
That means when
you vibrate them,
they generate a little bit of
electricity on their membranes,
and that stimulates growth.
So when you stand on
a whole body vibration
platform or the
cheap version on one
of those small mini trampolines,
although it's not as effective,
it unleashes piezoelectricity
in your bone cells
so that they grow.
Even wounds can heal faster.
Another hack that is
one of my favorites
that you'll go to a
clinic for is called PEMF.
And this is bursts of low
level magnetic frequencies that
heal damaged tissues
and especially bone they
can relieve injury related
pain and even stimulate organs.
This will build
bone more quickly
than anything else
I've ever seen.
These pulses that are
at low frequencies
go through your
skin and penetrate
deep into your muscle, into
your bones, into your tendons,
and even organs to
activate your cells energy
and encourage natural
repair mechanisms.
But even if you do all
of these things that
signal the body to
make stronger bones,
it won't work unless you have
two things that are important.
One of them is called
vitamin DAKE, D, A, K,
E. And this is a special blend
of vitamin D3, real vitamin
A that's preformed, and
specific forms of vitamin K,
and a specific
type of vitamin E.
So vitamin D, A, K, E,
vitamin DAKE and minerals.
There are more than 20
minerals in your bones,
and they all work together.
It's not about just calcium.
So vitamin DAKE tells the
minerals to go into your bones,
and you have to have
the minerals present.
There is a supplement that
is magic for bone density
that everyone should know about
if they have osteoporosis.
The supplement is called
calcium fructoborate.
It reduces inflammation,
and it protects
against the way inflammation
disrupts your bone.
So try calcium fructoborate if
you're working on bone density.
It takes about 30
years to lose the bone
that you built up
when you were young.
Unlike muscle, bone
sticks around for a while.
And if you keep doing what
you learned in this episode,
you can have bones that are
as strong when you're 80
as they were when you were 20.
And that's the goal.
So let's say now
that you've learned
how to put muscle on faster
than picking up rocks.
You've learned how to improve
your cardiovascular system
six times better than what
you're likely doing or not
doing today.
And you've learned how to
build those dense bones.
So you can become ripped.
As I'm recording this,
I am 8.6% body fat,
I have exceptionally
strong bones,
and I'm lean and very muscular
but not hyper muscular.
20 minutes a week is
my exercise routine
using all of the hacks in here.
And if I spent 40
minutes, I probably
put on a little bit more muscle.
But it's not a big
priority for me.
I'm very happy with
the way I look.
I look like I play
water polo, and I don't.
So how could I go from
weighing 300 pounds
to going down to 8.6% body fat?
It turns out it wasn't
from the exercise.
It was from the
episode on nutrition.
And if you combine nutrition
with fitness, magic can happen.
And one of the mistakes
that people make
is they believe that if you
can just exercise enough,
you'll get results.
If you exercise every single
day, especially the same way,
like I wake up, I go
for a five mile run,
and then I start my day.
You're doing it because you
believe that discipline,
and repeating this, and
grit and determination
are the things that
create results.
But the reality is that getting
the right signal into your body
at the right time at
the right frequency
is what causes rapid change
without the struggle,
without the grit.
And for some people,
this is triggering.
What do you mean I
don't have to work hard?
I've been working hard for
10 years on my exercise.
Well, OK.
What are your results?
If you've been exercising
consistently for 10 years,
you probably look pretty good.
But you also spent thousands
of hours in the gym
that you didn't
spend on something
that might have been more
important for you if you
could have done it.
So what I want
you to do is to be
able to build the body and
the resilience of someone who
has exercised a lot and
didn't get very good results.
But I want you to do a
much smaller amount of time
so that you can spend that
extra time, maybe doing
public service, maybe
just spend it meditating.
Of course, you'll learn more
about that later as well.
For every single thing you
think you have to work hard on,
there is a way to
not work as hard.
And I'm going to make
the argument for you
that you have a moral obligation
to not waste energy exercising
because your precious
energy can be used anywhere
you want to use it.
It's just not the highest
return on investment.
And yes, maybe I'm a little
bit upset by the fact
that I spent 702
hours in my mid-20s
at the gym desperately
trying to lose weight,
and it didn't work.
And at the end of
that, I believed
it was because I
didn't work out enough.
Maybe I should have done
it seven times a week.
And maybe I had
too much lettuce.
Because I had
already thrown away
the chicken and the
dressing from the chicken
salad because I was
watching calories.
So if you change those
two things around
you're going to find
that if you exercise
two times a week, that
that's enough to get results.
You do not need to do
exercise every day,
but you do need
to move every day.
So you could replace intense
exercise with a yoga class
because you love the
community of yoga,
because you like the breathwork.
You can replace it with a
walk, which is not exercise.
These are activities
that involve movement,
but they're not brief.
They don't create that signal
that causes the body to change.
And let's talk about
yoga for a minute.
It isn't exercise.
But it is so good
for stretching,
for creating that ability to put
your ankles behind your head.
And I don't know if I
can do this on camera.
But how many people do you
know who, without warming up,
can just sit like this and talk
and look completely ridiculous?
Well, I can do that because
I learned how to eat,
because I learned
how to stretch,
and I learned
functional movement.
And I walk around like
this all the time.
And I'm not bragging at all.
What I'm telling you
is that if I could
do this as a 300 pounds computer
hacker who couldn't touch
his toes, who had three knee
surgeries before I was aged 25,
if I had to come
back from all of that
and I can do this on
20 minutes of exercise
a week coming from behind,
imagine what would happen
if you learned a little
bit more about how to eat
and you actually spend
less time at the gym
than you do now with
the right tools,
what would happen if
you had more energy
and you had more results
at the same time?
That's why this is such an
important episode for you.
So go back through it and think
to yourself, do I want cardio
or do I want muscle?
Where will I start?
Which of these hacks
looks most interesting?
Maybe I'll start with REHIT.
Maybe I'll find a place that
can do the cheat machine.
Regardless, just
understand, you don't
have to exercise with grit and
sweat on yourself at 5:00 AM
every single morning.
You can if it makes you happy.
It's just not the fastest path.
Today, the world
needs people who
are healthy, high energy,
strong with time on their hands
to do good work.
That's you.
I'm Dave Asprey, and
this is Biohacking.
[MUSIC PLAYING]